
We've been seeing a worrying increase in pro-suicide content showing up here and, and also going unreported. This undermines our purpose here, so we wanted to highlight and clarify our guidelines about both direct and indirect incitement of suicide.

We've created a wiki that covers these issues. We hope this will be helpful to anyone who's wondering whether something's okay here and which responses to report. It explains in detail why any validation of suicidal intent, even an "innocent" message like "if you're 100% committed, I'll just wish you peace" is likely to increase people's pain, and why it's important to report even subtle pro-suicide comments. The full text of the wiki's current version is below, and it is maintained at .

We deeply appreciate everyone who gives responsive, empathetic, non-judgemental support to our OPs, and we particularly thank everyone who's already been reporting incitement in all forms.

Please report any post or comment that encourages suicide (or that breaks any of the other guidelines in the sidebar) to the moderators, either by clicking the "report" button or by with a link. We deal with all guideline violations that are reported to us as soon as we can, but we can't read everything so community reports are essential. If you get a PM that breaks the guidelines, please report it both and to us in modmail.

Thanks to all the great citizens of the community who help flag problem content and behaviour for us.

It's important to respect and understand people's experiences and emotions. It's never necessary, helpful, or kind to support suicidal intent. There are some common misconceptions (discussed below) about suicidal people and how to help them that can cause well-meaning people to inadvertently incite suicide. There are also people online who incite suicide on purpose, often while pretending to be sympathetic and helpful.

We're here to offer support, not judgement. That means accepting, with the best understanding we can offer, whatever emotions people express. Suicidal people are suffering, and we're here to try to ease that by providing support and caring. The most reliable way we know to de-escalate someone at risk is to give them the experience of feeling understood. That means not judging whether they should be feeling the way they are, or telling them what to do or not do.

But there's an important line to draw here. There's a crucial difference between empathizing with feelings and responding non-judgmentally to suicidal thoughts, and in any way endorsing, encouraging, or validating suicidal intentions or hopeless beliefs. It's both possible and important to convey understanding and compassion for someone's suicidal thoughts without putting your finger on the scale of their decision.

Anything that condones suicide, even passively, encourages suicide. It isn't supportive and does not help. It also violates reddit's sitewide rules as well as our guidelines. Explicitly inciting suicide online is a criminal offense in most jurisdictions.

Do not treat any OP's post as meaning that will definitely die by suicide and can't change their minds or be helped. Anyone who's able to read the comments here still has a chance to choose whether or not to try to keep living, even if they've also been experiencing intense thoughts of suicide, made a suicide plan, or started carrying it out.

In the most useful empirical model we have , the desire to die by suicide primarily comes from two interpersonal factors; alienation and a sense of being a burden or having nothing to offer. These factors usually lead to a profound feeling of being unwelcome in the world.

So, any acceptance or reinforcement of suicidal intent, even something "innocent" like "I hope you find peace", is actually a form of covert shunning that validates a person's sense that they're unwelcome in the world. It will usually add to their pain even if kindly meant and gently worded.

Keep the following in mind when offering support to anyone at risk for suicide.
• People who say they don't want help usually can feel better if they get support that doesn't invalidate their emotions. Unfortunately, many popular "good" responses are actually counterproductive . In particular, many friends and family tend to rely exclusively on trying to convince the suicidal person that "it's not so bad", and this is usually experienced as "I don't understand what you're going through and I'm not going to try". People who've had "help" that made them feel worse don't want any more of the same. It doesn't mean that someone who actually knows how to be supportive can't give them any comfort.
• Most people who are suicidal want to end their pain, not their lives. It's almost never true that death is the only way to end these people's suffering. Of course there are exceptional situations, and we certainly acknowledge that, for some people, the right help can be difficult to find. But preventing someone's suicide doesn't mean prolonging their suffering if we do it by giving them real comfort and understanding.
• An unfixable problem doesn't mean that a good life will never be possible. We don't have to fix or change anything to help someone feel better. It's important to keep in mind that the correlation between our outer circumstances and our inner experience is weaker and less direct than commonly assumed. For every kind of difficult life situation, you will find some people who lapse into suicidal despair, and others who cope amazingly well, and a whole spectrum in between. A key difference is how much inner resilience the person has at the time. This can depend on many personal and situational factors. But when there's not enough, interpersonal support can both compensate for its absence and help rebuild it. We go into more depth on the "it gets better" issue in which is always linked from our sidebar (community info on mobile) guidelines.
• There are always more choices than brutally forcing someone to stay alive or passively letting them end their lives.

To avoid accidentally breaking the anti-incitement rule, don't say or try to imply that acting on suicidal thoughts is a good idea, or that someone can't turn back or is already dead. Do whatever you can to help them feel cared for and welcome, at least in this little corner of the world. offer more detailed guidance.

Look Out for Deliberate Incitement. It May Come in Disguise.###

Often comments that subtly encourage suicidal intent actually come from suicide fetishists and voyeurs ( unfortunately this is a real and disturbing phenomenon ). People like this are out there and the anonymous nature of reddit makes us particularly attractive to them.

They will typically try to scratch their psychological "itch" by saying things that push people closer to the edge. They often do this by exploiting the myths that we debunked in the bullet points above. Specifically you might see people doing the following:
• Encouraging the false belief that the only way suicidal people can end their pain is by dying. There are always more and better choices than "brutally forcing someone to stay alive" or helping (actively or passively) them to end their lives.
• Creating an artificial and toxic sense of "solidarity" by linking their encouragement of suicide to empathy. They will represent themselves as the only one who really understand the suicidal person, while either directly or indirectly encouraging their self-loathing emotions and self-destructive impulses. Since most people in suicidal crisis are in desperate need to empathy and understanding, this is a particularly dangerous form of manipulation.

Many suicide inciters are adept at putting a benevolent spin on their activities while actually luring people away from sources of real help. A couple of key points to keep in mind:
• Skilled suicide intervention -- peer or professional -- is based on empathic responsiveness to the person's feelings that reduces their suffering in the moment. Contrary to pop-culture myths, it does not involve persuasion ("Don't do it!"), cheerleading ("You've got this!") or meaningless false promises ("Trust me, it gets better!"), or invalidation ("Let me show you how things aren't as bad as you think!"). Anyone who leads others to expect these kinds of toxic responses, or any other response that prolongs their pain, from expert help may be covertly pro-suicide. (Of course, people sometimes do have bad experience when seeking mental-health treatment, and it's fine to vent about those, but processing our own disappointment and frustration is entirely different from trying to destroy someone else's hope of getting help.)
• Choices made by competent responders are always informed by the understanding that breaching someone's trust is traumatic and must be avoided if possible. Any kind of involuntary intervention is an extremely unlikely outcome when someone consults a clinician or calls a hotline. (Confidentiality is addressed in more detail in ). The goal is always to provide all help with the client's full knowledge and informed consent. We know that no individual or system is perfect. Mistakes that lead to bad experiences do sometimes happen to vulnerable people, and we have enormous sympathy for them. But anyone who suggests that this is the norm might be trying to scare people away from the help they need.

Please let us know discreetly if you see anyone exhibiting these or similar behaviours. We don't recommend trying to engage with them directly.



Conclusion: Patients with intentional APP have high suicidal intent. Therefore, different interventions should be tailored to different patients.

Methods: In this cross-sectional study, we enrolled a total of 225 patients with intentional APP admitted to the emergency department of our Grade A comprehensive hospital in Shandong Province between June 2019 and January 2021. Patients were investigated using a health status interview questionnaire, Beck Suicidal Intent Scale, Duke Social Support Index, psychological stress scale, Dickman Impulsivity Inventory, Trait Anxiety Inventory, Center for Epidemiologic Studies Depression Scale, and Beck Hopelessness Scale. Descriptive statistics, single-factor analysis, and multiple linear regression were used for data analysis.

Introduction: Since pesticides have been widely used in agricultural production, acute pesticide poisoning (APP) has gradually become a worldwide public health problem. Recently, the number of APP cases has been high in China, and the intentional self-administration of pesticides is the main cause of APP. However, there is a lack of relevant studies on the factors influencing suicidal intent in patients with intentional APP. This study aimed to explore the current situation and influencing factors for suicidal intent among patients with intentional APP.

Since pesticides have been widely used in agricultural production, acute pesticide poisoning (APP) has gradually become a worldwide public health problem (1). Recently, the number of APP cases has been high in China, and the intentional self-administration of pesticides is the main cause of APP (1). In rural developing countries, intentional APP is the preferred method of intentional suicide (2).

In 2017, the World Health Organization (WHO) reported that intentional APP accounts for one-third of suicides worldwide (2). The 2019 edition of the WHO's guidelines on pesticide hazard classification emphasized that banning the use of high-risk pesticides could prevent the deaths of more than 155,000 patients with intentional APP (3). Due to APP's characteristics (which presents as a severe and rapidly changing disease), the mortality rate following APP is high, particularly in developing countries (4). For example, the mortality rate of patients with intentional APP in China is ~6.85% (5). Moreover, intentional APP has imposed a huge economic burden on many individuals and families, resulting in poverty for many rural families and severely affecting the social stability of rural areas (6).

Suicidal intent refers to a person's intent to end their life through suicide. Suicide attempters with high suicidal intent scores have a stronger intention to die than those with low intent scores and may have a higher risk of completing suicide (7).

Many factors, such as age, gender, history of suicide attempts, social support, negative life events, anxiety, depression, impulsivity, and psychological strain, among others, influence suicide intention (8–12). Studies on suicidal intent in Western countries mostly focus on patients with mental disorders, which may be because >90% of suicides in these countries are associated with mental illness (8, 13). We note that there are numerous studies on gender differences among patients with suicidal intent and the relationship between despair, depression, impulsivity, and suicidal intent (9–11). However, only ~30–63% of suicides in China are related to mental illness (14), and there is a lack of relevant studies on the factors influencing suicidal intent in patients with intentional APP.

Therefore, our study (building on previous work on suicidal intent) aimed to describe the suicidal intent of patients with intentional APP within 1 week of hospital admission and comprehensively discuss the influencing factors.

Convenience sampling was used to select patients with intentional APP admitted to the emergency department of our Grade A comprehensive hospital in Shandong Province between June 2019 and January 2021. We enrolled patients based on our study inclusion and exclusion criteria.

The study inclusion criteria were as follows: patients with intentional APP (with a clear diagnosis and clear awareness; family members or patients were surveyed regarding medical history and other information); within 1 week of admission; stable vital signs and ability to complete the questionnaire independently or with the help of the researchers; and the provision of informed consent and voluntary participation in this study. Those with language barriers or communication difficulties and those in serious condition were excluded from this study.

Overall, 225 of the eligible participants met the inclusion criteria, and 207 valid questionnaires were completed, with an effective rate of 92.0%.

To collect general demographic characteristics, we administered the “Health Condition Interview Questionnaire,” which was constructed by our research group. The main evaluated factors included age, gender, residential area, occupation, marital status, religious belief, mental illness before the suicide attempt, suicide attempt history, family history of suicide, untreated physical disease before the suicide attempt, economic level, family status, and negative life events. The relevance of clinical data to suicidal intent is shown in the Supplementary material.

Suicidal intent was measured using the Beck Suicidal Intent Scale (SIS), which is currently popularly administered worldwide (15). There are 15 items on the scale, among which items 1–8 are related to the objective environment comprising the context of the patient's suicidal behavior, and items 9–15 are related to the expectations and perceptions of the suicidal person. Each question is scored on a scale of 0–2. The higher the score, the higher the patient's suicidal intent (that is, the stronger the desire to die). This scale has been widely used in the Chinese population and has demonstrated good validity and reliability (16).

The Duke Social Support Index (DSSI), developed at Duke University, was also used for evaluation in this study (17). The DSSI comprises the following three subscales: the Social Interaction Subscale (SIS, four items), the Subjective Support Subscale (SSS, seven items), and the Instrumental Social Support Subscale (ISS, 12 items). The SIS and SSS represent Level 3 scores, while the ISS represents Level 2 scores. The sum of the scores of each subscale item represents the score for social support in this dimension, and the total social support score represents the sum of the scores of the three subscales. A higher score indicates a higher level of social support. The Chinese version of DSSI has previously demonstrated high validity and reliability in suicidal individuals (18).

Zhang (12) developed a mental strain scale to measure mental strain in questionnaire respondents. This scale includes 40 items and four measurement dimensions, each containing 10 items. The questions are scored on a scale of 1–5, ranging from strongly disagree to strongly agree. The higher the score, the more mental strain on a participant. This scale demonstrates good validity and reliability (19).

The Dickman Impulsivity Inventory (DII) was used to measure personality traits on impulsivity in this study. Dickman categorizes impulses into functional impulsivity (FI) and dysfunctional impulsivity (DI). There are a total of 31 items in the DII. Only the first 23 items were used in this study, with the DI subscale comprising 12 items and the FI subscale comprising 11 items. Each item is graded on a scale of 0–1, with an overall score of 0–23. The higher the scale score, the higher the individual's level of impulsivity. The Chinese version of the DII has demonstrated good validity and reliability in the Chinese population (20).

The Trait Anxiety Inventory used in this study was derived from the State-Trait Anxiety Inventory (STAI) (21). More specifically, the first 20 items are taken from the State Anxiety Inventory, and the last 20 items represent an anxiety trait subscale. The questions are scored on a four-point scale, with an overall maximum score ranging from 20 to 80. The higher the score, the more anxious the individual. A score of <50 is considered normal, a score of 51–60 represents mild anxiety, a score of 61–70 signifies moderate anxiety, and a score of >70 represents severe anxiety. Previous studies have demonstrated that the Chinese version of the STAI is a useful tool for measuring anxiety (22).

The Center for Epidemiologic Studies Depression Scale (CES-D) was used in this study to evaluate the frequency of depressive symptoms occurring in the past week (23). The scale cannot be used to diagnose clinical depression. Instead, the scale can only be used to evaluate the severity of depressive symptomology. This scale is suitable for use in general population studies. This instrument is scored on a scale of 0–60, and the higher the score, the greater the severity of depressive symptoms. A score of <10 indicates no depression symptomology, a score of 10–20 indicates possible depression, and a score of >20 represents definite depression. The Chinese version of the CES-D has demonstrated good reliability and validity among the Chinese population (24).

The Beck Hopelessness Scale (BHS) is used to quantify the degree of an individual's negative attitudes toward the future (25). The self-rating scale includes the following three dimensions: feelings about the future, loss of motivation, and expectations about the future. The BHS includes 20 items, and the original scale includes the following two answer options: “true” or “false.” To better reflect interindividual differences, this study extended the score to the following five levels: 1 = complete agreement; 2 = basically consistent; 3 = uncertain; 4 = more or less the opposite; 5 = exactly the opposite. Items 1, 3, 5, 6, 8, 10, 13, 15, and 19 are reverse entries. This instrument is scored on a scale of 20–100; the higher the score, the greater the sense of hopelessness. The Chinese version of the BHS has demonstrated good validity and reliability in previous studies of those attempting suicide (26).

SPSS statistical software (v.22.0, Chicago, IL, USA) was used for data entry and statistical analysis. For measurement data, if the data followed a normal or nearly normal distribution and had uniform variance, we generated descriptive data presented as mean ± standard deviation. In addition, t-tests were used for comparing means between two groups, and analysis of variance was used for comparing means between more than two groups. Medians and quartile spacing were used for statistical description if the data showed a non-normal or skewed distribution or uneven variances.

Non-parametric Wilcoxon rank-sum and Kruskal–Wallis H-tests were used for generating statistical inferences. The classification variables were described statistically as frequencies and percentages. Furthermore, correlation analysis was used to evaluate the correlations between variables. Pearson correlation analysis was used for bivariate, normally distributed data. Spearman rank correlation was used for the statistical analysis of non-normally distributed data. Continuous normally distributed data and multiple linear regression were used for regression analysis. Statistical significance was set at P < 0.05.

General demographic information and a single-factor analysis for the 207 patients with intentional APP included in this study are presented in Table 1. The results of the univariate analysis showed that age, residential area, marital status, occupation, history of attempted suicide, mental illness before intentional APP, economic status, and family status had statistically significant effects on the instrument-derived scores of the patients with intentional APP (P < 0.05).

The average suicidal intent score for patients with intentional APP was 14.23 ± 6.22. In the objective portion of the study, the average score for the help-seeking behavior item was the highest (1.55 ± 0.77); 72.0% of the patients with intentional APP did not contact or inform those who might help them before acting. In the subjective portion of the study, the score for patients' attitudes toward the suicide attempt was the highest (1.50 ± 0.68); 60.4% of the patients with intentional APP were serious about ending their own lives, as presented in Tables 2, 3.

We found a positive correlation between suicidal intent and psychological strain, hopelessness, anxiety, and depression in patients with intentional APP. The suicidal intent of patients with intentional APP was negatively correlated with impulsivity and social support, as presented in Table 4.

Multiple linear regression was conducted, with the suicidal intent of patients with intentional APP defined as the dependent variable and variables showing statistically significant differences on single-factor analysis (from among general sociodemographic, sociological, and psychological factors) defined as the independent variables.

A stepwise independent variable screening method was also conducted. The criterion for variable elimination was a P-value corresponding to an F value. The statistical significance levels of the entry and elimination variables were P ≤ 0.10 and P ≥ 0.15, respectively. Marital status, region of residence, impulsivity, hopelessness, depression, psychological strain, and social support were entered into the regression equation, with the following values assigned to the marital status and residential area variables: married and “other” = 1, never married = 0; rural = 1, urban = 0). The regression model was statistically significant F = 11.505 (P < 0.001; Table 5).

In our study, the average score for suicidal intent in patients with intentional APP was considerably higher than the scores for suicidal intent in individuals who made serious suicide attempts in rural China, as documented in previous studies (27). The total average score for suicidal intent in patients with intentional APP was also lower than the score for suicidal intent reported in a previous study by Tong et al. but was higher than the score for suicidal intent in patients who attempted suicide in that study (28). In the same study, more than half of those attempting suicide took pesticides; however, the intensity of suicidal intent in the pesticide users was lowest regardless of the endpoint of death or attempted suicide. Even in the group that had attempted suicide, the score was lower than in those using drugs to attempt suicide; this was inconsistent with the results of our study. The underlying reason may be that the patients admitted to the hospital selected in our study were in critical condition and that the number of patients taking poison was large. Furthermore, we found that the amount of poison taken was highly correlated with the intensity of the patient's suicidal intent, while no detailed clinical data have been reported in previous studies; this may represent one of the reasons for the observed differences in results between our study and previous work.

Moreover, our study showed that 72.0% of the patients with intentional APP did not contact or inform those who could help them before taking action, and that 60.4% of the patients with intentional APP were serious about wanting to end their own life. This is consistent with the results of previous studies among rural suicide attempters. For example, another study in China reported that only 39% of migrant workers sought help when needed, compared with 67% of urban residents (and 86% of non-migrant rural residents). Another study on Australian adults showed that 36.5% of the study participants were likely to seek help from anyone for suicidal thoughts (29), while many other studies have reported a higher prevalence of seeking help (30, 31). Some researchers have suggested that this may be due to the differential stigmatization of suicide in various cultures and populations (32). Chinese researchers have suggested that suicide is more stigmatized in China than in other countries due to the influence of Confucian culture. Since the Chinese are ashamed of suicide, fewer of those who may be experiencing suicidal ideation seek help before committing suicide.

In a previous study of rural suicide attempters in China, marriage was not found to be a protective factor for suicide (33). However, the study found that marriage was a protective factor for suicide attempts, with those who were never married demonstrating a higher degree of suicide attempts than those with a married or “other” (i.e., divorced, widowed, or separated) marital status, which is inconsistent with the results of previous research.

Previous studies have shown that age is a factor affecting suicidal intention. For example, a Spanish study (34) showed that suicidal intention decreased with the increase in age, and young people had higher suicidal intentions than older people. This is inconsistent with the results of this study. However, a study of attempted suicide in China concluded that advanced age could not be considered a risk factor for suicidal intent (35). The underlying reason may be associated with the age of the enrolled population. For example, studies enrolling younger students or school dropouts may show different results, as younger individuals generally have a less established value system and a reduced ability to withstand suffering. Younger individuals experiencing learning disabilities, higher academic pressure, conflicts with classmates, and fierce clashes with parents may cloud results for the many younger individuals with mental disorders enrolled in these studies. In contrast, for somewhat older unmarried men in rural areas, it is frequently difficult or impossible to find a suitable partner or even to pray for a happy marriage. Due to pressure to marry and the stigma and disappointment of failed relationships, many cannot withstand family and peer pressure, which may lead to a higher degree of suicidal intent (including in patients with mental illness).

In previous studies, the higher suicidal intention was frequently associated with mental disorders, and suicide attempts with mental illness have higher suicidal intention (36–38). Eddleston found that 40% of the pesticide group was diagnosed with mental disorders (39). Although the prevalence rate of mental illness diagnosis in this study was relatively low (21.7%), univariate analysis showed that the suicidal intention of patients with untreated mental illness before APP was higher than that of those without mental illness.

In a study, patients with intentional APP who were living in cities showed a higher degree of suicidal intent than those living in rural areas, which is inconsistent with previous research findings (28). Previous studies have speculated that suicide attempters living in rural areas may be more likely to take pesticides due to a lower degree of education, low-income family economic status, and various other reasons than those living in urban areas. Additional contributing factors may be that, barring an interest in purchasing pesticides online or through other means, access to pesticides is lower among urban dwellers; therefore, impulsive suicide attempts using pesticides are certainly less likely.

The study shows that social support is a protective factor for suicidal intent in patients with intentional APP. The higher the level of social support, the lower the level of suicidal intention. This is consistent with the findings of previous research (conducted both domestically and abroad) (40–42). Social support (particularly from family members) provides a support system that can effectively alleviate the psychological or spiritual pain caused by negative life events, thereby meaningfully reducing suicidal intent even in adverse circumstances. A study by Wilcox et al. reported that a low level of social support is a risk factor for persistent suicidal ideation and a predictor of suicide. Cross-cultural studies with large samples have also suggested that a high degree of social support is associated with a low suicide rate and that social support can be used as a clear means of suicide intervention (43).

This study found that patients with intentional APP had a higher incidence of anxiety and depression. This was higher in patients with mental disorders but without severe suicide attempts in a previous investigation conducted in rural China but lower in those with mental disorders and severe suicide attempts (28). Psychological problems in patients with intentional APP deserve attention. The results of the multivariate analysis employed in this study showed that despair was a risk factor for suicidal intent in patients with intentional APP. Moreover, many studies have shown that despair is one of the best predictors of suicide (44, 45), which is also consistent with the results of our study. Underlying reasons may be that people with a higher level of despair tend to be world-weary, lose enthusiasm and confidence in life, and have no hope for the future, thereby increasing their risk of suicidal behavior and leading to a higher level of suicidal intent. In our study, anxiety and depression were risk factors for suicidal intent in patients with intentional APP. Previous studies have demonstrated that suicide attempters with anxiety and depression have stronger suicidal intent (46), which is also consistent with the results of our study.

The results of the single-factor analysis employed in this study showed a correlation between suicidal intent and value strain, wish strain, relative deprivation strain, and coping strain in patients with intentional APP. The results of the multifactor analysis showed that psychological strain still had a predictive effect on suicidal intent when controlling for other relevant factors and that the higher the degree of psychological strain, the stronger the suicidal intent. This was consistent with the findings of the study by Zhang et al. (33) Our study further confirmed that psychological strain also showed a statistically significant predictive effect on suicidal intent in patients with intentional APP.

We have observed that the strain theory of suicide holds that strain exists before the suicide and has a meaningful predictive effect on suicidal behavior. This type of individual strain before suicide has been documented in suicide notes written by American suicide attempters (47). When torque-to-introverted aggression occurs, suicide will occur. In contrast, torque-to-extroverted aggression can lead to criminal behavior against others (48). Therefore, when psychological strain reaches a certain level, we should pay attention and adopt solutions to reduce psychological strain to prevent the occurrence of suicidal or criminal behavior.

Previous studies suggest that a large portion of suicide deaths and suicide attempts in China are impulsive behavior with weak suicidal intentionality, and the characteristics of these individuals are meaningfully different from those with strong suicidal intent (16). In this study, the multifactor analysis showed that impulsivity was a protective factor for suicidal intent in patients with intentional APP, further verifying that intentional APP is a characteristic form of impulsive suicide. A high level of impulsivity, frequently without careful consideration and occurring immediately before the implementation of suicidal behavior, is intuitively associated with lower suicide intentionality.

Previous relevant studies evaluating influencing factors for suicide intentionality have mostly focused on those attempting suicide in rural areas. This study conducted an in-depth analysis of suicidal intent in patients with intentional APP based on clinical data and completed the investigation within 1 week after the occurrence of the suicidal behavior. Moreover, this study evaluated more than 20 relevant factors, including those on demographics, sociology, psychology, and biology. This is conducive to our screening of factors related to suicidal intent in patients with intentional APP to provide a comprehensive and substantive reference for clinical intervention.

However, in addition to these substantial strengths, this study had some notable limitations. First, regarding the sampling methodology, convenience sampling was adopted instead of strictly following the principle of random sampling, which may have led to an inaccurate description of the epidemiological status of APP (i.e., differing from the overall status in the country). Second, this study focused on screening key risk factors without an in-depth discussion of the possible relationships between each factor. Therefore, future research should further explore the relationships between variables and raise the level of research on risk factors to theoretical construction. Third, considering the actual situation, the psychological variables included in this study are not significantly comprehensive, which will be further improved and supplemented in the future.

We found a relatively high level of suicidal intent in the population of patients with intentional APP. Unmarried patients living in cities with high levels of depression, despair, and psychological tension merit appropriate psychological interventions and physical treatment to promote recovery and reduce the incidence of repeated suicide. Therefore, different interventions should be implemented for patients with impulsive suicide attempts and strong social support.

The original contributions presented in the study are included in the article/Supplementary material, further inquiries can be directed to the corresponding authors.

The studies involving human participants were reviewed and approved by the Ethics Committee of Qilu Hospital of Shandong University. The patients/participants provided their written informed consent to participate in this study.

SM, JZ, and BK conceived and designed the study. SM, LSu, YZhe, YZha, LSh, YL, and GY collected and analyzed data. SM and ZW drafted the paper. JZ, BK, and XJ reviewed and edited the manuscript. All authors read and approved the manuscript and agree to be accountable for all aspects of the research in ensuring that the accuracy or integrity of any part of the work is appropriately investigated and resolved.

The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of their affiliated organizations, or those of the publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in this article, or claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed or endorsed by the publisher.

The Supplementary Material for this article can be found online at: https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fpubh.2023.1168176/full#supplementary-material


PODGORICA, 25 October 2022 – Having in mind recent suicides and suicide attempts among children in Montenegro, UNICEF is calling for the state to ensure that early signs of risks to children’s wellbeing are detected in a timely manner and that the child and the family are provided with adequate health, child protection and education services to prevent a tragedy happening.

“Suicides are preventable. We urge the national and local authorities to provide quality child, family support and mental health services to prevent suicides, and to ensure that children at risk, and their families, receive timely and quality professional support,” UNICEF Montenegro Representative Juan Santander said.

In Montenegro, UNICEF has supported the establishment of the National SOS Child Helpline 116-111 and the National SOS Parent Helpline 080 888 888. Over the years, UNICEF has supported the strengthening of the capacities of health, social work and education professionals, as well as the design and expansion of services reaching out and supporting children and families. These services must include home visits, family outreach worker service and counselling. With UNICEF’s support, parenting programmes have also been introduced to help caregivers constructively resolve various issues related to raising children. UNICEF has also supported the strengthening of socio-emotional life skills in adolescents through the in-school and out-of-school programme My Values and Virtues, so that every child has opportunities to learn to recognize and manage different emotions effectively.

However, as pointed out in the last EU Progress Report, Montenegro is still struggling with the limited availability and reach of child, family, victim support and mental health services, and the sustainability of the existing services is questionable.

For these reasons, UNICEF is calling for the state to fully meet its obligations from the Convention on the Rights of the Child and ensure the right of every child to life, growth and optimal development. This means that every child and family should be able to access quality child, family, mental health and victim support services. To this end, UNICEF is also appealing for an urgent increase in the number of child and family support outreach workers, child psychologists and psychiatrists across the country.

Children and families in need must be aware at all times of where and to whom they can turn for full support and protection in case they need to. For this reason, UNICEF Montenegro’s young reporters participated in the promotion of the National SOS Child Helpline 116-111. Last week, they spoke to their peers about mental health issues and the video with the voices of Montenegro’s young people on this topic is available here.

“I would recommend to my peers and all young people not to fight their internal battles alone. Seek help or advice, because it is easier when the problem is shared with a trusted person, be it a parent, friend, teacher, or even the free SOS support line for children and young people, available to everyone. You should not be ashamed and be a slave to the stigmatization common in society. This type of help should not be experienced as a defeat or failure, but as a proof of courage, because it is the only way to solve the problem and restore faith in life. Because life is beautiful. And remember, the world rests on us, the young,” said Manja Čalija, a UNICEF Montenegro young reporter involved in the production of the video with the opinions of Montenegro’s adolescents on mental health.

According to last year’s UNICEF global report The State of the World’s Children 2021; On My Mind: promoting, protecting and caring for children’s mental health, more than one in seven adolescents aged 10–19 globally is estimated to be living with a diagnosed mental disorder, and almost 46,000 adolescents globally die from suicide each year – among the top five causes of death for their age group.

The COVID-19 pandemic has worsened the mental health situation for people all over the world. While protective factors, such as loving caregivers, safe school environments and positive peer relationships can help reduce the risk of mental disorders, this UNICEF global report warns that significant barriers, including stigmatization and lack of funding, are preventing too many children from accessing the support they need for their mental wellbeing.

Therefore, for a national response to be effective, different sectors – health, education, social and child protection, the police, the judiciary and the media – all need to work together continuously to ensure that high-quality child and family support and mental health services are provided to families all over Montenegro. National and local authorities are responsible for ensuring adequate funding for this purpose.


• Immediate Help. Are you having thoughts of suicide right now?
• Please follow this link: Suicide: Get Help Now or CALL US at 707-826-3236. We are here for you 24/7.
• You can text this crisis text line:
• You can also CALL National Crisis Hotlines at 1-800-273-TALK (1-800-273-8255) or 1-800-SUICIDE (1-800-784-2433).
• Helpful Handouts
• PDF with local and national Suicide Prevention Resources from Humboldt County Dept. of Health & Human Services.
• PDF for those who are concerned about someone else's possible suicide risk: Suicide Warning Signs and Clues & How to Help
• Information and Advice: The Issue is Suicide
• The Issue is Suicide: Myths and Facts
• Check out the CAPS Pinterest Board on Depression and Suicide Prevention

The below materials were taken from THE ISSUE IS SUICIDE by Ralph L. Rickgarn of the University of Minnesota.

Suicide is not a neutral word. Suicide is not a neutral behavior. As a word, it evokes powerful emotional reactions regardless of the outcome. Fear, anxiety, disbelief and anger are but a few of the emotions that create an atmosphere which impedes involvement in the issues of suicide. As a consequence, attitudes and actions of avoidance and indifference occur. However, with adequate information and the creation of realistic expectations, this avoidance and indifference may be alleviated and replaced with positive actions and reactions.

Suicide is a traumatic event for the individual and for all of those people who have some connection with that person.

Suicide is a highly individualized behavior in reaction to multiple life stressors and interactions that have produced negative or perceived negative outcome.

The following is written to provide a framework of information and some methods of intervention. It is written in the hope that all members of the university will engage in the creation of a caring and confrontative community with some alternatives.

The question for an individual who becomes aware that another person is possibly contemplating suicide is, "Is this person here with me right now wanting to commit suicide and what can I do about it?"

An encounter with a suicidal person is always a deeply emotional experience. There is a fear of not knowing what to do, or doing the wrong thing. But the basic empathic, "I care about you", indicates that there is hope and help, two key ingredients in the intervention process. Misinformation often prevents individuals from becoming involved for fear of making a situation worse. There are many myths about suicide which deter individuals from becoming involved. What are the myths and what are the facts?

MYTH: People who talk about suicide rarely attempt or complete suicide. FACT: Approximately 70-75% of the people who attempt or complete suicide have given some verbal or non-verbal clue to their intentions. MYTH: Asking, "Are you thinking about committing suicide?" will lead the person to a suicide attempt. FACT: Asking direct, caring questions will often minimize the anxiety and act as a deterrent to suicidal behavior. MYTH: The tendency toward suicide is inherited. FACT: Suicide has no characteristic genetic quality. Suicidal patterns in a family are the result of other factors and may result from a belief in the myth which facilitates suicidal actions. MYTH: The suicidal person wants to die. FACT: Suicidal persons often reveal considerable ambivalence about living vs. dying and frequently call for help before and after a suicide attempt. FACT: Depression is often associated with suicidal feelings but not all persons who attempt or commit suicide are depressed. A number of other emotional factors may be involved. FACT: Many persons who have attempted or committed suicide would not have been diagnosed as mentally ill. MYTH: Once an attempt has been made, the suicidal person will always be suicidal. FACT: After a suicide attempt, a person may be able to "manage" and engage in no further suicidal action. MYTH: Suicide is more common in lower socio-economic groups. FACT: Studies of persons who have completed suicide indicate that 50% have sought medical help within six months of their action. FACT: Persons who have attempted or completed suicide usually give some indication of their intended behavior. MYTH: Motives or causes of suicide are readily established. FACT: Suicide is usually a lengthy and complex pattern of behavior where precise motives are difficult to ascertain. FACT: From studies it appears that neither suicide or attempted suicide is significantly related to weather phenomenon. MYTH: Improvement in a suicidal person means the danger is over. FACT: There is a significant danger within the first 90 days after a suicidal person is released from hospitalization. FACT: Suicide prevention by lay persons and centers has been an important, significant part of suicide prevention activities.

These myths and facts were synthesized from works by Blimling and Miltenberger (1981), Resnik (1968), Resnik and Hawthorne (1973) and Schneidman and Farberow (1961).

Approximately 70-75% of the individuals who attempt or commit suicide DO GIVE some indication of their impending action. Gollman (1971) lists some indicators of susceptibility toward self-destruction.
• Chronic Use of Other Chemicals

There is no single pattern or causative factor in suicide. However, most often there is an indication of hopelessness,a great deal of personal pain, and a belief that things are "out of control". These two feelings in particular are strong indicators of potential suicide. All indicators must be taken seriously.

How to respond or begin!
• The best intervention is to ask directly and caringly:

 ARE YOU THINKING ABOUT SUICIDE? Questions like, "You're not thinking of suicide are you?" indicate that the answer you want to hear is, "No, I'm not", and do nothing to facilitate a resolution of the individual's suicidal crisis.

REMEMBER: Asking will not put the idea into the person's head. Relief is often apparent when someone cares and is willing to talk. This can lead to an exploration of alternatives and a release of pent-up feelings.
• Some assessment of the circumstances needs to be made. How lethal is the proposed method of suicide? What are the person's exact intentions? Is there a specific plan? The lethality of the plan can range from a well thought out action involving a very lethal method (hanging, shooting, poisoning, or jumping) to a very low level of lethality (a nebulous idea with little feasibility of succeeding). THE MORE SPECIFIC THE PLAN, THE HIGHER THE RISK. Determining the method available is important. Any pills, guns, knives, should be removed for safekeeping.
• Never promise total confidentiality. Explain that you may need to discuss the situation with another individual in order to provide the best possible service.
• Verbally and non-verbally indicate your genuine concern. Be willing to discuss the suicidal thoughts and feelings of the individual.
• If possible, involve the person in a SUICIDE CONTRACT (this can be done verbally or in writing). Contracts can serve as a block to behavior. Sounds strange, but it works.
• Refer the individual to an appropriate agency for assistance. Be willing to accompany the person to the initial contact session or intake. Support is very important.

An attempted or completed suicide is always a traumatic experience in any setting. The survivors have to deal with the initial shock element and the aftermath of the trauma. Different reactions are experienced by peers, colleagues, staff, friends, faculty, parents , and significant others. Particularly in a residence hall, staff need to be aware of these reactions in order to respond appropriately.

Any or all of the following may be present:
• Anger - Both at the person and at self.
• Blame - "I should have been able to..."
• Guilt - "It's my fault for not ...."

These are some of the most common reactions. Grief is a common reaction in survivors. Individuals may experience periods of denial, rage, anger, bargaining, depression and acceptance. Grief is not measured only in fears and withdrawal, but equally in life, continuing to survive, grow and reach out to others.

"The person who commits suicide puts his psychological skeleton in the survivor's closet." (Schneidman, 1969, p.22)

Where there is a completed suicide or an attempt, Schneidman's statement rather succinctly defines what happens. Individuals do not want to be placed in the position of having to cope with someone's "psychological skeleton" Consequently, the tendency to avoid or to appear indifferent toward suicide occurs. Hopefully, with information and the development of a caring, responding attitude, the University community can respond to individuals who are suicidal in a positive and confrontative manner. And this same caring can also be shown to the survivors.
• ASK & Prevent Suicide: includes warning signs associated with suicidal behavior, what to do, access to crisis lines. Free. Versions for iOS and Android.
• Jason Foundation A Friend Asks: how to help a friend who might be thinking of suicide. Provides warning signs, do's and don'ts, and the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline, etc. Free. Versions for iOS and Android..
• ReliefLink: this innovative suicide prevention/mental health app won a $50,000 prize at a White House conference! It includes mood and behavior monitoring and tracking, safety planning, medications and appointment reminders, a help center map locator, built-in coping tools, & an emergency button. Free. For iOS.


Health information data for mental and brain health conditions is often lacking at country level or limited to certain geographic regions or demographics. In particular, low- and middle-income countries have limited epidemiological and health systems data.

The Department of Mental Health and Substance Use assists countries in strengthening health information systems for mental and brain health conditions through ongoing projects such as the Mental Health ATLAS and Neurology ATLAS or the Global Dementia Observatory (GDO).

The department’s efforts also support the global monitoring of relevant WHA mandates and UN SDG targets with indicators 3.4.2 (reduction of suicide mortality), 3.5.1 (treatment coverage for substance use disorders) and 3.5.2 (alcohol consumption). To find out more about the Department’s contributions to SDG monitoring see here: suicide reduction and alcohol/substance use.

Global research for mental and brain health conditions remains highly fragmented, with broad variability in levels of investment and quality of research, creating an urgent need to strengthen global research infrastructure, especially in low-income settings. Ensuring research harmonization and investigative approaches that cover prevention, treatment and cure, while ensuring research efforts are rooted in equity, diversity, and inclusiveness, is of critical importance.

WHO facilitates regular communication and information exchange between stakeholders in countries of all income levels in support of a globally-connected mental and brain health research community.


988 is now the three-digit dialing code that routes callers to the 988 Suicide & Crisis Lifeline (or 988 Lifeline). On July 16, 2022, the 988 Lifeline transitioned away from the National Suicide Prevention Line reached through a 10-digit number to the three-digit 988 Lifeline. It is funded by the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA) and administered by Vibrant Emotional Health (Vibrant).

When people call, text, or chat with the 988 Lifeline, they are connected to trained crisis counselors who are part of the existing 988 Lifeline network, made up of over 200 local crisis centers. These crisis counselors are trained to provide free and confidential emotional support and crisis counseling to people in suicidal crisis or emotional distress and connect them to resources. These services are available 24 hours a day, seven days a week, across the United States.

The previous 988 Lifeline phone number (1-800-273-8255) will always remain available to people in emotional distress or suicidal crisis.

The 988 Lifeline’s network of over 200 crisis centers has been in operation since 2005 and has been proven to be effective. Trained crisis counselors listen, provide support, and connect callers to resources when appropriate.

Callers who follow the “press 1” prompt are connected to the Veterans Crisis Line. A Spanish Language line is available by pressing 2, and more than 240 languages are supported through a Tele-Interpreters service. Callers now also have the option of following a “press 3” prompt to be connected to a crisis counselor specifically trained in supporting LGBTQI+ callers.

Numerous studies have shown that callers feel less suicidal, less depressed, less overwhelmed, and more hopeful after speaking with a 988 Lifeline crisis counselor.

Answer the call! 988 Lifeline centers are looking to bring on new volunteers and paid employees. You will receive training, so if you are looking to make a difference for those in crisis, apply today. Find your opportunity: 988lifeline.org/careers

For ways to support your local 988 Lifeline network crisis center, visit our Crisis Centers page here.

To learn about the impact of the 988 Lifeline, visit our new By the Numbers page.

To learn about what happens when you call, text, or chat with the 988 Lifeline, click here.

To learn more about the history of the 988 Lifeline, visit here.

To learn how Vibrant Emotional Health, the nonprofit administrator of the 988 Lifeline, has supported states’ implementation of the 988 Lifeline through grants, check here.

If you’re a veteran, service member, or loved one and want to know more about how 988 Lifeline works with the Veterans Crisis Line, click here.


Researcher: Leslie Adams, PhD, MPH

Institution: Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health 

Grant Type: 2020 Young Investigator Grant – $90,000

Grant Title: Real-time assessments of suicidality among Black men: a mixed methods approach To help prevent suicides, researchers are looking into using smartphone apps that collect real-time data about people's thoughts and feelings throughout the day. This method, known as ecological momentary assessment (EMA), could provide valuable insights. In the United States, the number of suicides among Black men has been rising, but the EMA method hasn’t been well studied with Black men experiencing suicidal thoughts and behaviors (STB). To examine whether Black men find it acceptable and practical to use a smartphone app for tracking STB, Dr. Leslie Adams recruited 10 Black men aged 18 and older with a history of suicidal thoughts or behaviors. For a week, participants received four daily prompts for short surveys on their mental state, depression, social isolation, and feelings of being a burden, along with nightly surveys on sleep quality and discrimination experiences. An end-of-study interview was also conducted. Most participants found the app acceptable and practical, despite some technical issues and repetitive questions. Some participants reported they felt worse after answering questions about suicide, which has not been found in other studies with different populations. These results indicate that smartphone-based data collection is feasible but more understanding about accounting for cultural differences is needed to improve effectiveness and user experience for Black men. Citation: Adams, L. B., Watts, T., DeVinney, A., Haroz, E. E., Thrul, J., Stephens, J. B., Campbell, M. N., Antoine, D., Lê Cook, B., Joe, S., & Thorpe, R. J., Jr (2024). Acceptability and Feasibility of a Smartphone-Based Real-Time Assessment of Suicide Among Black Men: Mixed Methods Pilot Study. JMIR formative research, 8, e48992. https://doi.org/10.2196/48992

Over the past 20 years, the number of suicides involving opioids has doubled, contributing to a serious public health problem. People who die by suicide and those who die by accidental opioid overdose exhibit many similar risk factors. While the trends and characteristics for both death by suicide and death by opioid overdose have been researched separately, the role of opioids in suicide is less known. There is also a growing hypothesis that a substantial portion of opioid-involved suicide deaths also involve other substances (i.e., polysubstance opioid suicide), but it is unclear if the characteristics of individuals who die by polysubstance opioid suicide differ from those who solely die by opioid overdose. Dr. Ryoko Susukida and her team analyzed data from 12,038 people who died in Maryland between 2006 and 2020, comparing those who died by suicide involving opioids (947 people), those who died by suicide without opioids (6,896 people), and those who accidentally died from opioid overdoses (4,125 people). They also examined people who died by suicide involving opioids and other drugs (polysubstance use). The team found that people who died by opioid-involved suicide were more frequently aged 18-64, non-Hispanic Whites, and unemployed or disabled than people who died by suicide with other methods. When compared to people who died by accidental opioid overdose, those who died by suicide involving opioids were more likely to be female, under 18 years old, non-Hispanic Whites, and those who were employed. Nearly half of the people who died by suicide involving opioids had other drugs involved as well, particularly among non-Hispanic Whites. These results suggest that people who died by suicide with opioids require special attention when developing suicide prevention interventions. Citation: Susukida, R., Nestadt, P. S., Kharrazi, H., & Wilcox, H. C. (2024). Prevalence and Correlates of Opioid-Involved Suicides in Maryland. Archives of suicide research : official journal of the International Academy for Suicide Research, 28(2), 660–673. https://doi.org/10.1080/13811118.2023.2207612

Researcher: Igor Galynker, MD, PhD, Benjamin Lok, PhD

Institution: Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, Florida International University

Grant Type: 2019 Linked Standard Research Grant – $300,000

Grant Title: Virtual Interaction Training in Emotional Self-Awareness for Working with Suicidal Patients Clinicians working with suicidal patients often experience high stress, which can contribute to negative emotional responses. These negative emotions can contribute to clinicians being less empathic, and they may unintentionally push patients away, harming the therapeutic relationship and worsening patient outcomes. Therefore, clinicians may need additional training on emotional self-awareness and empathic communication to manage potential negative emotions and improve their effectiveness with suicidal patients. One way of achieving this is with virtual human interaction training (VHI), which presents clinicians with virtually developed patients exhibiting a variety of clinical scenarios while measuring clinical effectiveness and empathic communication. As part of a multi-site linked AFSP grant, Dr. Igor Galynker and Dr. Benjamin Lok tested two virtual human interaction training conditions: one with instructions on verbal empathic communication and reminders to report negative emotions during virtual sessions (i.e., scaffolded), and one without any reminders or instructions (i.e., non-scaffolded). Sixty-two clinicians participated in three VHI sessions. Results showed that negative emotions decreased in both groups after two training sessions. The scaffolded group improved empathic communication after one training session, while the non-scaffolded group improved after two. Surprisingly, the non-scaffolded group had better clinical efficacy after two training sessions, while the scaffolded group did not. It turns out this was likely due to the method of providing reminders which may have been distracting. These results support VHI’s ability to improve emotional awareness and empathic communication in clinicians and suggest that nonverbal expressions of empathy may be crucial for working with suicidal patients. Citation: Yao, H., Gomes de Siqueira, A., Rogers, M. L., Bloch-Elkouby, S., Lawrence, O., Sarli, G., Foster, A., Mitelman, S. A., Galynker, I., & Lok, B. (2024). The impact of scaffolded and non-scaffolded suicidal virtual human interaction training on clinician emotional self-awareness, empathic communication, and clinical efficacy. BMC medical education, 24(1), 413. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12909-024-05371-9

Researcher: Ali Bani-Fatemi, PhD

Institution: Centre for Addiction and Mental Health (Canada) 

Grant Type: 2020 Postdoctoral Fellowship – $112,000

Grant Title: Imaging of the Suicidal Brain in Schizophrenia Schizophrenia is a psychiatric disorder that has been associated with risk for suicidal thoughts and behaviors. One hypothesis about what could contribute to this risk, called the “accelerated age hypothesis,” theorizes that several clinical features typically associated with older age that are experienced by individuals with schizophrenia (e.g., increased risk of cognitive impairment, inflammation, oxidative stress, and reduction of telomere length in blood cells) may play a part in increasing risk for suicidal thoughts and behaviors. With this in mind, Dr. Ali Bani-Fatemi and his team examined DNA from blood samples of adults with schizophrenia who had a history of suicide attempts, as well as of a separate group of adults with schizophrenia with no history of suicide attempts. Dr. Bani-Fatemi found that those who had attempted suicide showed signs of being 10.7 years older biologically (i.e., in their cells) than chronologically (i.e., their age in years). This accelerated aging was evident in both males and females, with males showing slightly more pronounced differences. The findings suggest that the stress and severity of schizophrenia might accelerate aging, increasing suicide risk. Measuring biological age could help identify increased risk for suicide in individuals with schizophrenia who may benefit from specifically tailored treatments that take biological aging into account. Citation: Jeremian, R., Bani-Fatemi, A., Strauss, J. S., Tasmim, S., Dada, O., Graff-Guerrero, A., Gerretsen, P., & De Luca, V. (2022). Investigation of accelerated epigenetic aging in individuals suffering from schizophrenia in the context of lifetime suicide attempt. Schizophrenia research, 243, 222–224. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.schres.2019.05.023 

Learn more about the AFSP research grants featured in this monthly roundup, as well as others, here.


WASHINGTON, D.C. (July 25, 2024) – The American Foundation for Suicide Prevention (AFSP) commends U.S. Surgeon General Vivek Murthy for releasing a new advisory today: Firearm Violence: A Public Health Crisis in America. Tragically, suicides by firearm comprise more than half (55% in 2022) of all suicide deaths in the United States. AFSP encourages several community-based approaches to prevent firearm suicide, several of which are reflected by the Surgeon General’s advisory, as well as the 2024 National Strategy for Suicide Prevention. These approaches must include collaborative suicide prevention education efforts within gun-owning communities.

Research shows that the risk of suicide is greater when firearms or other lethal means are present in the home or readily accessible. Ensuring that a person at acute risk for suicide does not have easy access to a firearm saves lives; research has consistently shown that when a chosen method of suicide is not accessible, most individuals will not move on to another method of suicide and if they do, it is less likely to be lethal. In addition, suicidal urges can intensify quickly so easy access to lethal means can be fatal; putting time and space between a person in crisis and lethal means allows time for the acute urge to pass and for the person to engage with healthy coping strategies.

AFSP strongly encourages further support at the state and federal levels of government for legislation, policies, funding and executive action to prioritize firearms-related research, provide education on the relationship between suicide and firearms, implement voluntary firearm removal initiatives, expand lethal means education and counseling practices within healthcare systems, and increase access to mental health, substance use, and trauma-informed care. These include:
• Continued investment in mental health and crisis care services. AFSP urges lawmakers at the state and federal levels to prioritize sustained investment in mental health services and crisis care support. This includes the need for full implementation of the Bipartisan Safer Communities Act which will save lives, including through the expansion of school-based mental health services and professionals.
• Training for healthcare professionals on lethal means safety counseling, screening for suicide risk, and making referrals to mental health resources and care. Individuals with heightened risk for suicide are often seen in clinical settings, particularly emergency departments. Incentivizing health systems to implement suicide prevention protocols, including training health professionals to identify, support, and provide referrals for patients who may be at elevated risk will help save lives. When a patient’s suicide risk is detected if the patient has access to a firearm in the home, healthcare professionals should work with the patient and their family when possible on voluntary strategies to store household firearms away from the home, or otherwise ensure secure firearm storage, until the patient recovers.
• Public investments to support research regarding firearms and suicide prevention. More data are needed on which firearm policies are most effective in preventing suicide, which educational efforts are most effective in promoting secure firearm storage, and how best to bring promising practices to scale so we can implement more widespread change nationwide. This includes AFSP’s strong support for continued federal investment in gun violence prevention research.
• Community storage options and temporary transfer exceptions. When an individual is at risk for suicide, being able to store firearms outside the home can save lives. This includes storage options at gun shops, shooting ranges, police departments, community lockers, and other special storage facilities. To support the ability for an individual in crisis to store their firearm outside the home, AFSP supports temporary transfer exceptions in background check laws in cases of suicide risk.
• Voluntary do-not-sell list programs. These are lists where individuals can register themselves to voluntarily restrict their own ability to purchase and/or own a firearm. Only the person in question can enter themselves onto such a voluntary do-not-sell list, and the list is used for no other purpose than for firearm purchases or firearm ownership. AFSP supports the establishment of voluntary do-not-sell lists at both the state and federal levels and commends the multiple states that have successfully established voluntary do-not-sell lists.
• Laws that call for the creation and dissemination of educational materials and/or training on the relationship between access to lethal means and suicide prevention, and secure firearms storage. These include efforts to publish and distribute brochures on firearms safety and suicide prevention, distribute secure firearm storage devices, educate firearms instructors and clinicians in lethal means safety, and to put suicide prevention information on firearm warning labels and on the premises of licensed firearm dealers.
• Extreme risk protection orders. AFSP urges policymakers at all levels of government to support policy initiatives to allow for extreme risk protection orders (ERPOs) to be used as a tool to help prevent suicide when voluntary efforts to separate an at-risk individual from firearms are unsuccessful or impossible and suicide risk is imminent.

AFSP appreciates the Surgeon General’s leadership, and we look forward to working alongside our chapters, partners, and policymakers to promote the advisory and save lives.

The American Foundation for Suicide Prevention is dedicated to saving lives and bringing hope to those affected by suicide, including those who have experienced a loss. AFSP creates a culture that’s smart about mental health through public education and community programs, develops suicide prevention through research and advocacy, and provides support for those affected by suicide. Led by CEO Robert Gebbia and headquartered in New York, with a public policy office in Washington, D.C., AFSP has local chapters in all 50 states, D.C. and Puerto Rico, with programs and events nationwide. Learn more about AFSP in its latest Annual Report and join the conversation on suicide prevention by following AFSP on Facebook, Twitter, Instagram, YouTube, LinkedIn and TikTok.

Media interested in comment on this news are encouraged to fill out this press request form and review AFSP’s Ethical Reporting Tips.


MALVERN PA, (June 18, 2024) — Actress, humanitarian, and author Ashley Judd will speak at HMP Global’s 2024 Psych Congress national meeting, participating in a fireside chat with American Foundation for Suicide Prevention (AFSP) Chief Medical Officer Christine Yu Moutier, MD, about mental health, grief, and loss.

Psych Congress, America’s leading conference on practical psychopharmacology, will be held October 29 – November 2 in Boston. In partnership with AFSP, Psych Congress delivers critical education resources for mental health clinicians aimed at preventing suicides.

Judd became a passionate advocate for suicide prevention and privacy protections for loss survivors after her mother, renowned country singer Naomi Judd, died by suicide in April 2022. Among her recent work, Judd and singer-songwriter Aloe Blacc worked with the Biden administration to unveil and promote the 2024 National Strategy for Suicide Prevention and its accompanying Federal Action Plan, a comprehensive, 10-year strategy for addressing mental healthcare gaps and meeting the needs of at-risk populations.

“Ashley Judd has done tremendous work to strengthen protections for the loss survivor community and create public awareness about the role we can all play in preventing suicide,” said Dr. Moutier. “AFSP is honored to be working alongside her and our partners at Psych Congress to strengthen the ability of healthcare providers on the front lines to deliver mental health interventions and resources that save lives.”

“We are proud to partner with AFSP to host Ashley Judd at this year’s meeting, as we work together to educate clinicians and develop life-saving strategies for at-risk patients,” said Psych Congress Co-Chair Rakesh Jain, MD, MPH. “Nearly 50,000 people in the United Stated died by suicide in 2022. This is an urgent public health challenge.”

Educational Program

Psych Congress’ five-day educational program includes over 100 psychopharmacology focused sessions presented by more than 50 internationally renowned faculty presenters. Three pre-conferences are scheduled this year, including PA Institute, covering the essentials for psychiatric physician assistants; Advanced Psychopharmacology Institute, featuring four cutting-edge, emerging therapies; and Psychedelics Preconference.

A welcome session debate, “Psychedelics in Psychiatry,” will delve into the polarizing topic of psychedelics in psychiatry, featuring Steering Committee member Charles Raison, MD, and — taking the Psych Congress stage for the first time — Stephen Stahl, MD, PhD. New this year, a MATE Act Training post conference will be held, where participants can fulfill the new DEA requirement for 8 hours of training on opioid or substance use disorders, required for all prescribers.

“Psych Congress continues to expand and enhance its agenda, offering more practical psychopharmacology content than any other conference, and enabling mental health professionals improve patient care and outcomes,” said Psych Congress Co-Chair Greg Mattingly, MD.

Partners include the American Association for Geriatric Psychiatry, AFSP, the Association of Physician Assistants in Psychiatry, Caregiver Action Network, Depression and Bipolar Support Alliance, the International Society of Reproductive Psychiatry, and the Schizophrenia & Psychosis Action Alliance.

Psych Congress is designed and accredited for all members of the mental health team. For more information, sponsorship options, or to register, visit psychcongress.com.

ABOUT AFSP

The American Foundation for Suicide Prevention is dedicated to saving lives and bringing hope to those affected by suicide, including those who have experienced a loss. AFSP creates a culture that’s smart about mental health through public education and community programs, develops suicide prevention through research and advocacy, and provides support for those affected by suicide. Led by CEO Robert Gebbia and headquartered in New York, with a public policy office in Washington, D.C., AFSP has local chapters in all 50 states, D.C., and Puerto Rico, with programs and events nationwide. Learn more about AFSP in its latest Annual Report and join the conversation on suicide prevention by following AFSP on Facebook, Twitter, Instagram, YouTube, LinkedIn and TikTok.

Media interested in comment on this news are encouraged to fill out this press request form and to review AFSP's recommendations for reporting on suicide.

ABOUT HMP GLOBAL 

HMP Global is the omnichannel market leader in healthcare events, education, and insight — with a mission to improve patient care. For 40 years, the company has built trusted brands including Psych Congress, the premier source for mental health education, and the Symposium on Advanced Wound Care (SAWC), the largest wound care meeting in the world. HMP Global partners with leading experts around the world to deliver more than 450 annual events, medical strategy, and marketing for pharmaceutical and medical device customers through HMP Collective, and pharmaceutical market insight, engaging a global community of healthcare stakeholders that includes nearly 2 million clinicians across 600 medical specialties as well as managed care, behavioral health, senior living, emergency medical, and pharmaceutical commercialization professionals. For more information, follow HMP Global on LinkedIn or visit hmpglobal.com.


Each May, our country shines a spotlight on two important issues, through Asian American and Pacific Islander Heritage Month and Mental Health Awareness Month. Technically, these are two separate awareness holidays. But for me, my mental health and Asian American identity feel closely intertwined — so I have always found the overlap of these two moments a perfect, cosmic coincidence, and an opportunity for self-reflection. In addition to working through the connection between my own mental health, racial heritage, and immigrant background, I have also aimed to help others do the same.

From a young age, I struggled to understand the incongruence I felt between the Asian and American aspects of my identity. But one day, a fellow immigrant explained that feeling of incongruence quite simply and beautifully. For those of us who bridge two worlds, we often experience three cultures: first, our culture of origin; second, the culture to which we immigrate; and third, a culture born from the experiences of balancing between the first two. For me, a former orphan from South Korea, I became used to strangers assuming that my parents were also Asian, that I was most likely Buddhist, and that their children could seek my help as a math tutor. In reality, I grew up with many of the usual American symbols of Midwest domesticity: church on Sundays, Friday dinners at Pizza Hut, and Saturdays spent roaming the local mall. Each time a stranger made assumptions about me, I would smile and politely laugh it off, but those misconceptions only deepened my uncertainty about where I belonged. If I didn’t fit in with my white peers, and I no longer fit in with my Asian peers, where did I belong? As I have continued to be more open in my discussions of mental health and my personal exploration of identity, I have learned that this friction, this internal battle to navigate one’s third culture, is a common journey for many immigrants.

As both a Volunteer Advocate for the American Foundation for Suicide Prevention’s North Dakota Chapter (through which I help AFSP’s public policy office pass important suicide prevention policies at the state and federal level) and the Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion (DEI) Liaison for Clay County Public Health just a short drive over in Minnesota, I have seen firsthand the mental and emotional struggles experienced by families navigating third cultures. In both of these roles, I have the opportunity to engage with diverse populations and explore ways that we can improve our community’s health services. Many of the people I work with have resettled in the U.S. as refugees of war or persecution in their homelands. The process of relocation alone can be mentally and emotionally traumatic. But on top of that, they are also navigating the pressure of trying to carry forward ethnic traditions while still integrating new and unfamiliar American practices.

When I sit with these families and listen to their stories of struggle, I always feel compelled to share as many mental health resources as possible, including the 988 Suicide & Crisis Lifeline number, 988. As a Volunteer Advocate for the American Foundation for Suicide Prevention, and also as a community health worker, I know firsthand that the implementation of 988 was a profound milestone and a critical step toward decreasing national suicide rates.

At the same time, as I continue to work with and observe families who exist in third culture spaces, I have come to realize that the fundamental concept of 988, like much of our behavioral health support systems, is deeply rooted in American principles. Reaching outside of the family for help, talking about deeply personal feelings and thoughts with a stranger, and even using the term “mental health” are all practices that can contradict those of many of our New American families. (The term "New American" is one we have come to use locally in many nonprofit circles when referring to immigrants and asylum seekers, since labels like "refugee" can carry a lot of stigma, and can even create barriers to employment due to discrimination.)

In Clay County, where I work, a large percentage of New Americans speak Kurdish, Arabic, Somali, and French. Because of this, our Public Health Center has translated 988 informational flyers into each of those languages. This update to Clay County's mental health resources has not only allowed us to reach a wider audience, but it has also opened the door to even more conversations about how to improve our crisis services.

At the height of the pandemic, many public health workers saw the gap in health equity widening for racially marginalized people. Our county government recognized this issue taking place on a local level, and took action by creating my position as DEI Liaison. In addition, they began working with individuals from our New American communities to better understand ways to provide culturally competent health services, including mental health services. Engaging in this collaborative work meant meeting people in familiar gathering spaces, talking through and addressing common questions, including whether 988 provides interpreters for non-English speakers (the answer, by the way, is yes! And for an incredible 240-some languages!). Together, county government and New American communities have also established critical training like Mental Health First Aid and removed barriers to access like cost, which was possible because of a partnership with our local AFSP chapter.

In 2020, when the 988 Suicide & Crisis Lifeline was signed into law, advocates across the country celebrated the historic moment, while still knowing the work of implementation was just beginning. Four years later, as communities like mine continue to grow and diversify, defining the fight of building a better and more adaptive mental health crisis system continues to evolve. So, as I pause to reflect and acknowledge both Asian American and Pacific Islander Heritage Month and Mental Health Awareness month, I am hopeful and inspired to see a future where suicide prevention ultimately reaches every corner and every culture in our country.

To learn more about Sarah's story, read her Volunteer Spotlight in our 2023 Annual Report.

For more information on mental health and suicide prevention support for Asian American and Pacific Islander people, we encourage you to read and share this list of resources.


WASHINGTON — (June 5, 2024), The American Foundation for Suicide Prevention (AFSP) is hosting its 15th Annual Advocacy Forum from June 9 to 12, 2024, in Washington, D.C. Nearly 250 Volunteer Advocates from across the country will gather at the nation’s capital to call on Congress to prioritize lifesaving suicide prevention and mental health policies. On June 11, Advocates will meet with over 250 Congressional offices to share their personal stories and urge them to co-sponsor and support vital legislation for the 988 Suicide & Crisis Lifeline and the full continuum of crisis care. AFSP will also honor members of Congress and their staff who have been critical and leading champions in the efforts to support the 988 Lifeline and suicide prevention.

Preventing suicide is an urgent public health matter. In 2022, 49,476 people died by suicide, making it the 11th leading cause of death in the country. AFSP and its network of Volunteer Advocates are meeting this moment by focusing on legislation supporting the 988 Lifeline, which provides behavioral health support to people who experience or want to support someone in suicidal crisis or emotional distress 24 hours a day, seven days a week, 365 days a year, across the United States. After enacting the three-digit dialing code in July 2022, the 988 Lifeline received nearly four million contacts during its first year in use, which was a 33 percent increase from the year before. It is an intervention proven to save lives.

“AFSP Volunteer Advocates have seen many wins over the past 15 years of our advocacy movement, including the establishment of the three-digit dialing code for the 988 Suicide and Crisis Lifeline securing millions in funding for research at the National Institutes of Mental Health and funding for comprehensive suicide prevention programming at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,” said AFSP Executive Vice President and Chief Policy Officer Laurel Stine. “We all have a role to play in preventing suicide, and our Advocates are proof that every call, letter, email, meeting and story shared makes a difference.”

During meetings with members of Congress and their staff, AFSP Volunteer Advocates will call for support on legislation that will increase awareness, local response rates and wraparound services for the 988 Lifeline. This legislation includes:
• None This Act will require colleges and universities to provide contact information for the 988 Lifeline on student ID cards, or if not, then issued via websites/student portals. I n the U.S., 82% of people are not familiar with 988. Making it easy for students to find and share the 988 number will improve access to lifesaving crisis resources and destigmatize reaching out for help.
• None ): This will require carriers to route wireless calls and texts based on the proximity of an individual to a contact center rather than on the area code while protecting a caller’s privacy. The bill also requires that multi-line systems support the direct dialing of 988, rather than requiring a caller to dial another number first. 988 is about more than answering calls. It’s also about connecting people to local services, support and resources at critical moments making this bill essential.
• None To authorize $30 million for a new federal grant program to help eligible 988 contact centers provide follow-up services to individuals who received suicide prevention and crisis services. Follow-up services such as check-in calls and collaboration with loved ones can be critical to helping people in crisis; 80% of surveyed crisis line callers reported that follow-up services helped save their lives.

“It's inspiring to work together with advocates from all over the country at the AFSP Forum. By speaking to legislators about important policies that will address mental health and suicide, I can truly be the voice for suicide prevention,” said Wyoming Volunteer Advocate Donna Birkholz. “I have lost friends and family to suicide, but also have friends and family who got help and survived. 988 is a crucial tool for helping more people find the support they need, when they need it.”

Forum attendees will learn strategies to impact legislation and hear from experts on the 988 Lifeline and continuum of crisis care working to expand 988 nationally and at the state level including:
• None Deputy Chief of Staff and Director of Communications, Office of U.S. Representative Don Beyer (VA-8)

Keynote presentations will be given by:

Video remarks will be provided by:

This year, AFSP will bring back the Allies in Action Awards Program. Awards will be presented on Tuesday, June 11 on Capitol Hill to members of Congress and their staff who have been champions and critical in the efforts to support the 988 Lifeline and suicide prevention.

Attendance at the Forum is by invitation only; however, AFSP also hosts a Virtual Advocacy Forum open to the public. It will begin at noon ET on Tuesday, June 11, on AFSP’s Facebook and YouTube channels. Everyone can support AFSP’s legislative priorities and contact their members of Congress through the AFSP Action Center—every voice makes a difference!

For a full agenda and list of speakers visit the 2024 Advocacy Forum webpage. To learn more about AFSP’s support of the 988 Suicide & Crisis Lifeline visit https://afsp.org/988.

The American Foundation for Suicide Prevention is dedicated to saving lives and bringing hope to those affected by suicide, including those who have experienced a loss. AFSP creates a culture that’s smart about mental health through public education and community programs, develops suicide prevention through research and advocacy, and provides support for those affected by suicide. Led by CEO Robert Gebbia and headquartered in New York, with a public policy office in Washington, D.C., AFSP has local chapters in all 50 states, D.C. and Puerto Rico, with programs and events nationwide. Learn more about AFSP in its latest Annual Report and join the conversation on suicide prevention by following AFSP on Facebook, Twitter, Instagram, YouTube, LinkedIn and TikTok.

Media interested in comment on this news are encouraged to fill out this press request form and review AFSP’s Ethical Reporting Tips.

Researcher: Candice Biernesser, PhD

Institution: University of Pittsburgh

Grant Type: 2021 Young Investigator Grant – $79,821

Grant Title: Development and Feasibility Testing of a Suicide Prevention Intervention for Sexual and Gender Minority Youth With the increase in youth having access to online platforms in recent years, online victimization (OV) is a growing issue that has been linked to suicide risk for adolescents. OV can take the form of disparaging remarks, images, or behaviors that cause harm. Experiences of OV have disproportionately impacted LGBTQ youth, who are three times as likely to attempt suicide as non-LGBTQ youth. While social media can provide important benefits for youth through connection and affirming resources, current interventions and services contain gaps in supporting LGBTQ youth who experience OV. With this in mind, Dr. Candice Biernesser and her team developed Flourish, a digital suicide prevention intervention for LGBTQ youth who have faced online victimization. To codesign Flourish, Dr. Biernesser conducted qualitative interviews with 20 LGBTQ youth with a history of experiencing OV and suicidal thoughts and behaviors along with 11 of their parents, and 10 LGBTQ-focused professionals. After identifying priorities for the service based on feedback, the team developed a partially automated, text message intervention leveraging web-based content to create a safe space for LGBTQ youth to seek support for OV through education, coping skills, and help-seeking resources. The team then conducted prototype testing with a different group of 10 LGBTQ adolescents which yielded excellent usability ratings. The next step for Dr. Biernesser and her team is to test the feasibility and efficacy of Flourish in a larger sample. Citation: Biernesser, C., Win, E., Escobar-Viera, C., Farzan, R., Rose, M., & Goldstein, T. (2023). Development and codesign of flourish: A digital suicide prevention intervention for LGBTQ+ youth who have experienced online victimization. Internet interventions, 34, 100663. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.invent.2023.100663

Peer and bullying victimization refer to the repeated experience of being the target of aggressive behavior, such as being pushed or hit, called names, made fun of, or being excluded from a group. It is often characterized by an imbalance of power between the perpetrator and the victim. Research has shown that bullying victimization in childhood has been linked with an increased risk for suicidal thoughts and behaviors, but no study has yet explored the possibility of an increased risk of dying by suicide. To explore this gap, Dr. Marie-Claude Geoffroy and her team conducted a 50-year nationwide cohort study using data from the 1958 British Birth Cohort, which is an ongoing longitudinal study of 17,638 individuals born within one week of each other in March 1958. Dr. Geoffroy conducted analyses on 14,946 individuals whose mothers reported bullying victimization for their children at ages 7 and 11. Of the subgroup, 55 people had died by suicide between the ages of 18-52 years old. Though the effect was small, having been bullied was associated with death by suicide when other factors weren’t considered. It’s unclear if this effect would hold with more information, but the importance of implementing suicide prevention efforts in childhood is supported by these findings. Citation: Geoffroy, M. C., Arseneault, L., Girard, A., Ouellet-Morin, I., & Power, C. (2023). Association of childhood bullying victimisation with suicide deaths: findings from a 50-year nationwide cohort study. Psychological medicine, 53(9), 4152–4159. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0033291722000836

Researcher: Daniel Cox, PhD

Institution: University of British Columbia

Grant Type: 2017 Young Investigator Grant – $82,986

Grant Title: What Reduces Suicide Ideation in Online Crisis Chats? A Study of Crisis Counselor & Client Processes When people experience suicidal crises, they often struggle with relationships, which can contribute to difficulties in forming a therapeutic bond with clinicians. Even though research has shown that building a strong relationship between clinician and client is crucial for effective outcomes in therapy, especially for those thinking about suicide, we don’t know much about how relationship struggles show up in therapy sessions. We also don’t know much about how relationship struggles can impact one-time crisis therapy sessions. With this is mind, Dr. Daniel Cox and his team looked at how the relationship between crisis counselor and client affects the client's desire to die by suicide and examined the outcomes of one-time, 30-minute online crisis therapy sessions. Dr. Cox analyzed 354 sessions with clients who were actively suicidal and using an online crisis service for the first time. The team measured suicidal desire, the strength of the therapeutic relationship throughout the sessions, and the outcomes (e.g., acceptance of referral to external services and acceptance of crisis-center follow-up). The results indicated that a strong relationship between crisis counselor and client helped reduce suicidal desire and led to better outcomes. These results highlight the importance of training therapists on how to build strong relationships with clients who are in acute suicidal crises. 

Citation: Cox, D. W., Deptuck, H. M., Fischer, O., & Wojcik, K. D. (2024). The role of the therapeutic bond when working with clients in suicidal crisis. Journal of counseling psychology, 71(2), 115–125. https://doi.org/10.1037/cou0000724

Researcher: Virginia Willour, PhD

Institution: University of Iowa 

Grant Type: 2019 Focus Grant – $1,488,788

Grant Title: An Integrated Approach to Understanding the Biology of Suicidal Behavior In the field of suicide prevention research, some scientists have focused on finding genetic differences that are specifically active for people who die by suicide. This search is complicated by both the biological and methodological challenges of conducting genetic research. While some genetic markers have been found before, many are still unknown, especially those affecting how genes work in the brain. Dr. Virginia Willour and her team looked at the genetic data from specific brain areas of people who died by suicide to see how gene activity might relate to suicide risk. They studied data from 986 suicide cases and 415 non-suicide controls, using information collected from several genetic databases. The team found differences in one specific genetic marker (rs926308) that is linked to lower activity of a gene (RFPL3S) important for brain development and arousal. They also identified 20 other genes that could potentially be related to suicide risk. Ten of these genes are also linked to mental health disorders like schizophrenia and autism, which can be associated with suicide. This study provides new insights into the genetic and biological mechanisms that might lead to suicide. Further study of the functions these genes serve is needed. Citation: Han, S., DiBlasi, E., Monson, E. T., Shabalin, A., Ferris, E., Chen, D., Fraser, A., Yu, Z., Staley, M., Callor, W. B., Christensen, E. D., Crockett, D. K., Li, Q. S., Willour, V., Bakian, A. V., Keeshin, B., Docherty, A. R., Eilbeck, K., & Coon, H. (2023). Whole-genome sequencing analysis of suicide deaths integrating brain-regulatory eQTLs data to identify risk loci and genes. Molecular psychiatry, 28(9), 3909–3919. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41380-023-02282-x 

Learn more about the AFSP research grants featured in this monthly roundup, as well as others, here.


